---
layout: post
title: How to Start a Startup - Lecture 2 Notes
category: posts

---

I'm taking down notes for Sam Altman's class, How to Start a Startup and I figured I'd start sharing them. This is for the [second lecture](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CVfnkM44Urs) with the following notes:

# Choosing a co-founder
- Don't choose a random co-founder
- Choose someone you have a long history with
- When something goes really wrong, you have a past history that binds us together
- Meet a co-founder in college
- Meeting co-founder while working in a startup
- Starting a startup alone is **STILL** a bad idea
- Model for choosing a co-founder:
	- Look for a person that behalves like "**James Bond**" rather than one that's an expert in a particular domain
- Tough and calm co-founder IF you aren't.
- You need a technical co-founder
- Average number of co-founders: 2-3
- *Q. How about co-founders that aren't working in the same location?*
	- **DO NOT DO IT!**

# How to Hire
## Don't Hire
- First, try **NOT** to hire
	- The goal is not to hire for as long as possible
	- E.g. Airbnb hired only two people in the first year, and took 5 months
- Find people who feel that they're apart of the founding of the company
- Hire slowly and with a high hiring bar

## How to ACTUALLY Hire
- Recruiting is hard, not everyone wants to join. It can take a year sometimes.
- It's important to get the product right first

> If you're going to join a startup, pick a "rocketship". Something that *you* know is going to be huge, but not everyone realizes yet.

- Good people wait to see if you're going to be a "rocketship"
- How much should you spend hiring: 0% or 25%

## Mediocre engineers do not build great companies
- This can kill the company
- They are needed to build the culture of the company
- If you comprise in the first ~10 hires that may just **kill** the company
	- *Will I bet the future of the company on this single hire?*
- When you're bigger, you will eventually comprise..

## Sources of Candidates
- Personal referrals for the first 100
- Look outside the SV, it's brutally hard to hire in SV
- Experience:
	- Experience matters for some roles.
	- Early hires doesn't matter much, you need to look for aptitude.
	- *Are they smart? Do they get things done? Do I want to spend a lot of time around them?*
- *Q. How do you know if their initial in-experience is going to be okay when things scale up?*
	- People who are smart can almost always find a role in the company.
	- May need to move to a different role or team.
	- Great employees can move around easily and it's usually an issue.

- Best way to hire is to work with them to hire. Sometimes you don't need to even interview if you've worked on the same project together.
- **Call references!**
	- *Is this person in the top 5% of the people you've ever worked with?*
	- *What specifically did you do?*
	- *Will you hire them again? Why aren't you hiring them again?*
- If someone cannot communicate clearly, that's a BIG problem in the future that they'll work out
- Someone who likes to take a bit of risk.

### The Animal Test
- "You should be able to describe any employee as an animal of what they do."
	- You need unstoppable people
- Mark Zuckerberg said he likes to hire people:
	1. He would spend time socially
	2. He'd be comfortable reporting to if the roles were reversed (you need to have high respect for them).

## Employee Equity
- 10% to the first ten employees.
- Don't be stingy with equity to employees, investors only write the check.
- Fight with investors to reduce the equity they get.
- *Q. When should co-founders decide on the equity split?*
	- Set this very soon as you get started.
	- If you're not willing to give them equal shares, you should question if this is the right relationship?

- *"You shouldn't tell your employees they're fucking up everyday otherwise they will."*
- Learn to praise your team, you need to give people more responsibility.
- Dan Pink (TED) talk on Autonomy, Mastery and Purpose.
- Use one-on-ones.

# How to Fire..
- Every first-time founder waits too long
	- It's better for you, and them
- Fire people who create office politics and always negative
	- These will kill a startup!
- *Q. How do you balance firing people fast and make early employees feel secure?*
	- Anyone will screw up once or twice
	- If someone is getting every decision wrong, it's be blatantly obvious who these people are amongst others.
	- In practice, there's almost never any doubt.
- *Q. What if you're relationship with a co-founder breaks down?*
	- You have to have "vesting".
	- Pre-negotiate how this will play out before this ever happens.
	- In SV, it takes four years to earn all of that.
		- E.g. If you leave after one year, you keep 25% of that, two years; 50%, etc.
	- If the company leaves with half the company, getting investments is VERY hard after that.
	- **Talk about it early, don't let it fester!**

# Execution
- The way to execute well is to execute it yourself.
- You need to been executing tasks; creates company culture this way.
- Put in the effort

## Jobs of a CEO
- Set the vision
- Raise money
- Evangelize
- Hire and manage
- Make sure the entire company executes (!)
	- Can you figure out what to do?
	- Can you get it done?

### Can you get it done: Focus
- There are several things that need your attention.
	- You need to figure which of the two or three tasks are the most important, get those done and differ the rest.
- Say no. A Lot.
- Don't work really hard on the things no one cares about.
- Set overreaching goals.
	- This is what the whole company focuses on then.
- Communication
	- You can't be focused without really good communication.
- Maintain growth and momentum
	- Have the right metrics and be focused on growing
- Don't get (the company) distracted or excited with other things (PR).
- Work together. Again, remote co-founders DO NOT WORK.

### Can you get it done: Intensity
- Startups can't give you a good work/life balance - that's the reality.
	- They're all consuming.
	- You have to be able to outwork your competitors.
	- You have to be intense (needs to come from co-founders).
- Obsess with quality
	- You need to have a culture where people have high quality standards for everything the company does, but still move quickly.
	- Move fast and break things.
	- Be frugal in the right places, but care about quality everywhere.
	- "*Don't buy people shitty computers, if you don't want them to write shitty code."*
- Be decisive/Quick
	- Talk about grand plans, but be biased towards action.
	- It lets you done in incremental pieces. In the end, you have a huge project completed.
- Show up
	- Get on a plane in marginal situations. <- This is good *literal* advice
- Momentum and growth are the life-blood of startups
	- Always keep momentum!

## Growth
- When there's a disagreement among the team on what to do, you ask your users.
	- Stuff isn't working right now, we don't actually hate each other, we just need to get back on track.
- Shipping a product
- Launching a new feature
- Reviewing/reporting metrics and milestones

> Don't worry about a competitor at all until they're actually beating you with a shipped product. Don't get down because of the press.

> "The competitor to be feared is one who never bothers about you at all, but goes on making his own business better all the time." - Henry Ford
