---
layout: post
title: How to Start a Startup - Lecture 13 Notes
categories: posts
tags: [Archived]

---

I'm taking down notes for Sam Altman's class, How to Start a Startup and I figured I'd start sharing them. This is for the [thirteenth lecture](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQ7ZvO5DpIw) with the following notes:

# How to be a Great Founder

## Perception

- Perception of a founder: 
	- Elon Musk, Bill Gates, Steve Jobs, etc.
	- An image of Superman/Superwoman
- Reality:
	- Someone who deals with a lot of problems
	- No one is generally "superpowered"
	- You want to have a couple of "superpowers", something that gives you an edge
	- Although, this is not a function of genius
	- It's hard to tell the difference between genius/madness
- Potential skills of a founder:
	- Founding Team
	- Location
	- Delegation
	- Flexibility
	- Vision
	- Focus
	- Confidence
	- Evaluation
	- Risk
	- Persistence
	- Data
	- Time Horizon
- May seem like a super human task
- You don't necessarily want to score 10/10 in all the skills of a founder

### Team

- It's usually best to have two/three people as the founders (broad set of skills to spread)
- You can compensate with other founders weaknesses
- Diversity of problems as a founder, you can go at them from different angles
- Have a high degree of trust with those co-founders (see previous lectures for more detail)

### Location

- In order to be successful, I need to go where the strongest networks are where the particular kind of problem that I'm trying to solve.
- Silicon Valley is good for software products (not for all though!)
	- This is due to various off-topic reasons
- e.g. Groupon needed massive numbers of sales forces. Silicon Valley is suboptimal for plans where you want to rent a 20 storey building full of sales people. Groupon was required to be in Chicago which is good at this.
- What kinds of startups would someone be an idiot to do in SV?
	- e.g. Designing a fashion company. Great idea, but there isn't a good network for it here!

- Should I be a contrarian?
	- *(A contrarian is a person who takes up a contrary position, a person who seems to be "contrary for the sake of being contrary,")*
	- Its hard to be contrarian and right.
	- How does a smart person actually disagree with me?
	- A really good contrarian idea: what would smart people (in that field) think is a good idea.
	- In general, as a founder, it's good to be a contrarian.

### Delegation

- Should I do the work or delegate the work?
	- In truth: both
- Should I be recruiting people?
- Sometimes one at 100% or the other at 100%

### Flexibility

- Should I be flexible or persistent?
	- Again: both
- You get opinions from both ends of the spectrum on how to do this.
- Have an investment thesis (possibly contrarian) on why you think is potentially a good idea.
	- Should include what you know that others don't know
	- Do I have an increase in confidence or decreasing?
- If increasing, stay on track, be persistent
- If decreasing, you don't have to necessarily jump out
	- What do we do to fix this? (flexibility)

### Confident

- Should I be confident or cautious?
	- Third time: both
- I have my vision of how the world should be **BUT** smart enough to listen to criticism, negative feedback, competitive entries.
- Is this changing my investment thesis?

### Internally

- Should I focus internally or externally?
	- People in the back haven't heard: both
- Internally: Build the product, ignore the world, ignore competitors
- Externally: Recruiting, meeting people, gathering network intelligence

### Vision or Data

- Should I work by vision or data?
	- Both
- Data: motivated by data, gather the data, be guided by the data
- *Data* only exists within the framework of a *vision* you are building to

### Risk

- Should I take risks or minimize risks?
	- Both
- You have to be a risk taker
- One of the skillsets you need to build on is, how do I make intelligent risks
	- How do I minimize my other risks with this? (i.e. two birds with one stone)

### Vision

- Should I focus on the short term or long term?
	- Both
- Jump between the two
- Solve the problem that's immediately in front of you
- Short term: What do I need to be doing today? Have I made progress today?
	- **BUT**, is it largely on path?


## How do you know if you are a Great Founder?

- You should have *some* superpowers
- Useful to be a product person (in software especially)
- Useful to have leadership and persuading people
- Recognizing whether you're on track or not (am I *STILL* on track with my thesis?)

- There's no one skillset
- There's an ability to learn and adapt, and the ability to constantly have a vision that drives you, and take input from all sources and take networks from around you. (!)

## Questions

Q. *How did you stick with a strategy to get your investment thesis?*

**Ans.**

- The problems in 2003 were different from what we have now. They (LinkedIn) sent out invitations to different people, and got PR to get people.
- Now, how are you competing for potential customers?
- What is the hack that I know that others don't?

----------

Q. *How do you know if someone is a good founder or not?*

**Ans.**

- I'm a believer of references
- Only meet with people through a reference
- It's a way to sort out time
- Network is really key

----------

Q. *Density of insight is a strong signal for great founders. Being able to distil a thesis into a concise sentence.*

**Ans.**

- The ability to be coherent on what you're targetting.
- NOT a Swiss army knife approach
- Founders who have analyzed the problem in a good way
- Founders who do not have a good analysis, but have an instinct on what they're doing

----------

Q. *What kept you going with persistence (RE: LinkedIn)?*

**Ans.**

- Believing the right economic system design was to have a public professional profile
- It may not have taken off the speed that we want
- It takes us longer to get there, but that's okay

----------

Q. *When you get a founder that you think is going to be good. What makes you get wrong about someone who looks good at first observation?*

**Ans.**

- Conviction in the person when they're trying to reason with you is what you look for in a founder
- Sometimes you find people who have learned to mimic that behaviour. They look like they're thinking about the challenges that you're bringing up but they're actually ignoring you.
- Adaptability questions
- Is there an ego issue that might get in the way

----------

Q. *Co-founding team, how to evaluate how to be co-founders?*

**Ans.**

- Serious trust
- People say don't invest in a husband-wife team (since personal dynamics can affect)
- You should ask: do they collaborate well? Do they help each other get to truth?
- Adjusting to what is the truth (i.e. people who work off each other)

----------

Q. *Different founder, different areas. How do you identify them?*

**Ans.**

- This talk is about, what is unique to all founders as a whole (not specifically technology).
- Investors try to understand a domain so they cam better invest in that domain.
- Each domain has a set of attributes in that domain.

----------

Q. *How do you know when to stay in longer than expected? Or when do you pivot?*

**Ans.**

- The part of the reason of having an investment thesis (IT)
- If your confidence in IT is decreasing for a very long time:
	- You've gone into intense mode to see what could do to increase confidence
	- When *THAT* starts failing, then you should consider pivoting.
- A frequent mistake: wait till everything has crashed into the wall. You waited way too long!
- Founders have no balance
	- While you are working on this thing, you cannot remain balanced. It is 100% of you that goes into it.
	- *(This isn't forever, but maybe for a couple of years before you go off to do other things)*

----------

Q. *How good is the startup eco-system in identifying contrarian opportunities?*

**Ans.**

- Mixed.
- Generally, the system is good at it.

----------

Q. *What you do think about creating markets vs. covering them?*

**Ans.**

- What would lead you to believe what would be a market there or not?
- What is it that you think you know that others don't know.

----------

Q. *When do you know someone long enough to ask someone to be their co-founder?*

**Ans.**

- It's one of the risks that you take
- You're going to spend 20+ hours with this person, do you feel comfortable doing that?
- Have a set of robust conversations with this person that you can later bring up (re-iterating trust)
