---
layout: post
title: How to Start a Startup - Lecture 10 Notes
categories: posts
tags: [Archived]

---

I'm taking down notes for Sam Altman's class, How to Start a Startup and I figured I'd start sharing them. This is for the [tenth lecture](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RfWgVWGEuGE) with the following notes:

# Building Culture

## What is Company Culture?
- Everyday _(a)_ and _(b)_ for each member of the team in pursuit of our company _(c)_.
	- (a) = assumptions, beliefs, values, core values
	- (b) = behaviours, actions
	- (c) = goals, bhag (big hairy audacious goal), mission.

### Why is matters?
 - **First Principles** that you go back to when you make decisions.
 - **Alignment** people to values that matter to the company.
 - **Stability** to fall back on.
 - **Trust** each other with.
 - **Exclusion**
 - **Retention**

- It takes time to come up with a set of culture values that the company believes in.
- Took a year to ask employees what core values they wanted and bring it down to 10.
- Everyone says we want honest, service, team work, etc.
- Instil the idea that it's company first, department, team and then yourself.

### Elements of high performing teams
- **Trust** you can actually have debates if you have conflict and debate.
- **Conflict** if you don't have conflict and debate, it's just the blind leading the blind
- **Commitment** people are not willing to commit then.
- **Accountability** people are not held accountable to things they committed to
- **Results** you can't get results then.

### Best practices
- Incorporate your mission to your values
- Perforamnce - think harder, deeper, longer
- Interview for culture fit (!)
- Evaluate performance on culture
- Make it a daily habit - if you don't you eventually stop doing it and the company slowly dies

## Q/A with Brian (Airbnb)
### Q. The process by which you came to realize that culture was important?

**Ans.** 

- Airbnb was supposed to be the idea to pay the rent to think of the big idea.
- We were lucky to have a team that were up to your level (see lecture 9 notes).
- Founders are like parents
	- The company is the children: it's up to the "parents" to set the right attitude.
	- You would want your child to endure and out live you.
- **Core values learned:**
	- Behaviours that change over time
	- Some principles that never change.

### Q. How long did it take you to hire your first employee?

**Ans.** 

- First employee was the first engineer.
- Interviewed for 4 months.
- Your first engineer was bringing in DNA to your company
	- There would be a 1000 people like this person.
	- Do I want to work with 1000 of this kind of people
	- You want diversity of backgrounds, age, etc.
		- *You don't want diversity of values*

### Q. What are Airbnb's values?

**Ans.** 

1. Champion the mission - we want to hire people for the mission.
2. Be creative & frugal
*(better to watch this bit with the stories)*

### Q. How does having a story culture helped you make strong decisions?

**Ans.**
Three things no one tells you about culture:

1. No one ever tells you about culture
2. It's hard to measure
3. It doesn't pay off in the short-term

- Interview for World Class & they fit the culture.

### Q. Culture and brand were two sides of the same coin. Talk about branding for a bit.

**Ans.**

- There's no such thing as a good or bad culture. A culture that's good for someone doesn't necessarily have to be a good culture for you.
- Brand is the connection between you and customers. If you have a really strong culture, the brand will come through.


### Q. How did you communicate what Airbnb does in the early days?

**Ans.**

- Early days, we communicated like a utility - it's a cheap alternative to hotels.
	- This under-cut the ideas.
- Did a lot of story telling.
- Articulate the vision over and over again.

### Q. How do we make sure the hosts are re-enforcing the culture of Airbnb?

**Ans.**

- Late to realizing this, but are gradually re-inforcing this in every step of the way.
- Bad hosts were seriously affecting the business.
- Hosts are partners. Had to get hosts that believed in this same values.
- The super-host program gives them extra support and stuff.

### Q. Airbnb has made contributions to the open source community. Thoughts on how that contributes to the thoughts around the development team?

**Ans.**

- We try to be a generally open culture.
- Strong identification of the team.
	- Every company needed a mote that protects from your competition.
	- Wanted to be better technology. Changed this to be giving the best experience in the world instead.
- The engineers (with those same strong culture values) independently decided this was a thing they should do.

### Q. There weren't that many visitors to the site when trying to get off the ground. How did you get users to the site?

**Ans.**

- (Not about culture)
- "It's better to have 100 people who love you, than to have a million people that just kinda sorta like you." - PG
- **To get 100 people to love you, you need to do things that don't scale.**
- Living with your users and spending time with them.
- Giving them attention to the point that they were really passionate.
- A lot of things were done manually for the users.
- Until they knew exactly what the perfect service was, *only then did they create the tools and technology to do it.*

### Q. A lot of people think Airbnb is more of a marketing company? Thoughts?

**Ans.**

- Have to work with a lot of things like people's *ACTUAL* security since there are people sleeping in their hosts' sheets.
- Countries that need to be convinced that this is a good thing for them.
- Matching the right people with the right hosts.
- These are just a few of the things that they have to do, so it would be wrong to call them a marketing company.